=head1 NAME

expac - alpm data extraction utility

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Usage: I<expac> [options] E<lt>formatE<gt> targets...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

expac is a data extraction tool for alpm databases. It features printf-like
flexibility and aims to be used as a simple tool for other pacman based
utilities which don't link against the library. It uses pacman.conf as a config
file for locating and loading your local and sync databases.

Invoking expac consists of supplying a format string, which is generally
described by one to many of the formatting tokens (see the B<FORMATTING>
section), any relevant options and zero to many targets. The format string
B<must> be the first non-option argument. Targets can be a simple package name,
a query string (in the case of a search), or in C<repo/package> syntax.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-Q, --query>

Search the local database for provided targets. This is the default behavior.

=item B<-S, --sync>

Search the sync databases for provided targets.

=item B<-s, --search>

Search for packages matching the strings specified by targets. This is a
boolean AND query and regex is allowed.

=item B<-g, --group>

Return packages matching the specified targets as package groups.

=item B<-H, --humansize> <size>

Format package sizes in SI units according to I<size>. Valid options are:

  B, K, M, G, T, P, E, Z, Y

=item B<-1, --readone>

Stop searching after the first result. This only has an effect on -S operations
without -s.

=item B<-d, --delim> <string>

Separate each package with the specified I<string>. The default value is a
newline character.

=item B<-l, --listdelim> <string>

Separate each list item with the specified I<string>. Lists are any interpreted
sequence specified with a capital letter. The default value is two spaces.

=item B<-p, --file>

Interpret targets as URLs or paths to local files.

=item B<-t, --timefmt> <format>

Output time described by the specified I<format>. This string is passed directly
to strftime(3). The default format is %c.

=item B<-v, --verbose>

Output more. `Package not found' errors will be shown, and empty field values
will display as 'None'.

=item B<-h, --help>

Display the help message and quit.

=back

=head1 FORMATTING

The format argument allows the following interpreted sequences:

  %B    backup files

  %C    conflicts with

  %D    depends on

  %E    depends on (no version strings)

  %F    files (only with -Q)

  %G    groups

  %L    licenses

  %N    required by

  %O    optional deps

  %o    optional deps (no descriptions)

  %P    provides

  %R    replaces

  %S    provides (no version strings)

  %a    architecture

  %b    build date

  %d    description

  %f    filename (only with -S)

  %g    base64 encoded PGP signature (only with -S)

  %h    sha256sum

  %V    package validation method

  %i    has install scriptlet (only with -Q)

  %k    download size (only with -S)

  %l    install date (only with -Q)

  %m    install size

  %M    modified backup files (only with -Q)

  %n    package name

  %p    packager name

  %r    repo

  %s    md5sum

  %u    project URL

  %v    version

  %w    install reason (only with -Q)

  %!    result number (auto-incremented counter, starts at 0)

  %%    literal %

Note that for any lowercase tokens aside from %m and %k, full printf support is
allowed, e.g. %-20n. This does not apply to any list based, date, or numerical
output.

Standard backslash escape sequences are supported, as per printf(1).

=head1 EXAMPLES

Emulate pacman's search function:

=over 4

  $ expac -Ss '%r/%n %v\n    %d' <search terms>

=back

List the oldest 10 installed packages (by build date):

=over 4

  $ expac --timefmt=%s '%b\t%n' | sort -n | head -10

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Dave Reisner E<lt>d@falconindy.comE<gt>

